add document defining an OpenTelemetry Collector (#4313)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification: specification/collector/README.md

<!--- Hugo front matter used to generate the website version of this page:
path_base_for_github_subdir:
  from: tmp/otel/specification/baggage/_index.md
  to: baggage/README.md
--->

# OpenTelemetry Collector

The goal of this document is for users to be able to easily switch between
OpenTelemetry Collector Distros while also ensuring that components produced by
the OpenTelemetry Collector SIG is able to work with any vendor who claims
support for an OpenTelemetry Collector.

- An OpenTelemetry Collector _MUST_ accept a OpenTelemetry Collector Config file.
- An OpenTelemetry Collector _MUST_ be able to be compiled with any and all

>   additional Collector plugins that the user wishes to include.

Reviewer: Should this specification define what an OpenTelemetry Collector plugin is? Is it any component of type receiver, processor, exporter, extension, or config map provider?

Reviewer 2: Specification needs to define _all_ the terms used in this definition, otherwise it does not remove ambiguity.

Author: Renamed plugin to component and added a section to define OpenTelemetry Collector component.

> - A compiled instance of an OpenTelemetry Collector – with a specific set of
>   plugins and features – is referred to as an OpenTelemetry Collector Distro.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- An OpenTelemetry Collector Distribution (Distro) is a compiled instance
  of an OpenTelemetry Collector with a specific set of plugins and features.
```
This would match the rest of the formatting too

Reviewer 3: lgtm :) i can't resolve my own comment, but u can resolve.

>   plugins and features – is referred to as an OpenTelemetry Collector Distro.

Reviewer 3: Will another section contain the initial set of required plugins and features?

Author: There is no required set of features or components

<!--- Hugo front matter used to generate the website version of this page:
path_base_for_github_subdir:
  from: tmp/otel/specification/baggage/_index.md
  to: baggage/README.md
--->

# OpenTelemetry Collector

The goal of this document is for users to be able to easily switch between
OpenTelemetry Collector Distros while also ensuring that components produced by
the OpenTelemetry Collector SIG is able to work with any vendor who claims
support for an OpenTelemetry Collector.

> - An OpenTelemetry Collector _MUST_ accept as OpenTelemetry Collector Configuration

Reviewer 4: Not sure if it's a typo:

```suggestion
- An OpenTelemetry Collector _MUST_ accept an OpenTelemetry Collector Configuration
```

  file.

> - An OpenTelemetry Collector _MUST_ be able to be compiled with any and all

Reviewer 4: Do we want to emphasize "compiled"? I think the specification is trying to avoid being too specific to the actual implementation, maybe reword this to "MUST be able to be used with any additional ...".

Reviewer 5: Does this ultimately come down to requiring that an `OpenTelemetry Collector` must be [Open Source](https://opensource.org/osd)?  There is no binary plugin mechanism on the horizon so the only way for a user to bring new components is to build a new collector, which means they need the source and license to modify it to include new components.

>   additional Collector components that the user wishes to include.

Reviewer 4: What does "Collector components" mean? Are these scoped to just the components in the opentelemetry-collector and opentelemetry-collector-contrib repo?

Reviewer 4: I saw this is clarified later in the doc, consider adding a link here.

Author: done 👍🏻

> ## OpenTelemetry Collector Configuration file

Reviewer 4: nit: the uppercase "C" and lowercase "f" seem a bit weird.

Author: updated

<!--- Hugo front matter used to generate the website version of this page:
path_base_for_github_subdir:

>   from: tmp/otel/specification/baggage/_index.md
>   to: baggage/README.md

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  from: tmp/otel/specification/collector/_index.md
  to: collector/README.md
```

--->

> # OpenTelemetry Collector

Reviewer 2: OpenTelemetry Collector is never defined. Is it a source code artifact? A binary?

Reviewer 5: That's one of the things I was trying to get at [here](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/4313#discussion_r1862569350).  Since there's no binary plugin mechanism it seems that the source would need to be available for it to be extended in the manner contemplated, but that's not clear or explicit in the current state.

Reviewer 4: > Since there's no binary plugin mechanism it seems that the source would need to be available for it to be extended in the manner contemplated, but that's not clear or explicit in the current state.

Is the lack of binary plugin mechanism something that the OpenTelemetry Collector SIG wants to solve? Are there technical blockers?

Binary and dynamic loading plugin seem to be an established pattern. For example:
* https://github.com/fluent/fluent-bit-go
* https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/administration/configuring-fluent-bit/yaml/plugins-section

    _While Fluent Bit comes with a variety of built-in plugins, it also supports loading external plugins at runtime. This feature is especially useful for loading Go or Wasm plugins that are built as shared object files (.so)._

Reviewer 5: The Fluent Bit example is not necessarily apposite as it involves a C application dynamically loading shared libraries built with the Go toolchain using CGO (which is [generally prohibited](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/docs/coding-guidelines.md#using-cgo) in the Collector codebase).  

Go does have a [native plugin mechanism](https://pkg.go.dev/plugin), though it comes with many caveats and is widely regarded as a bad idea that can't be dropped due to compatibility guarantees.  Its documentation sums up its litany of restrictions in this way, which sounds a lot like a suggestion to use something like `ocb`:

> Together, these restrictions mean that, in practice, the application and its plugins must all be built together by a single person or component of a system. In that case, it may be simpler for that person or component to generate Go source files that blank-import the desired set of plugins and then compile a static executable in the usual way.

The goal of this document is for users to be able to easily switch between
OpenTelemetry Collector Distros while also ensuring that components produced by

> the OpenTelemetry Collector SIG is able to work with any vendor who claims

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
the OpenTelemetry Collector SIG are able to work with any vendor who claims
```

> support for an OpenTelemetry Collector.

Reviewer 5: I'm not sure I understand this goal.  If a vendor produces a collector distribution that has a subset of available components because those are the components relevant to their service offerings and that they're willing to support, where do any other components (whether hosted in an OTel repo or not) fit into that picture?  Do we mean that a distribution must offer end users the ability to modify its source and create their own build?  We should be explicit about that if that is the case.

Given that the licensing of the collector's source code does not require that distribution of derivative works happen in source form I'm not sure that we have much ability here to enforce such a requirement.  We can certainly try to use the "OpenTelemetry" mark as a cudgel, but I'm not sure it'll be as effective as may be desirable since the terms "collector" and "distribution" are very broad.  It could perhaps be argued that "OpenTelemetry Collector" is a protectable mark and maybe even that "Collector" has acquired secondary meaning in this limited scope, but protecting such a mark against genericization is going to be a Sisyphean task.

Reviewer 6: I see this definition as separation from the term `Distribution` defined below.  A Distribution is a specific compiled OpenTelemetry Collector with a specific set of OpenTelemetry Collector Components that the maintainer (the user in this case) decided to add.  It is a OpenTelemetry Collector bc the maintainer was able to bring their chosen OpenTelemetry Collector components to it.

Something is not an OpenTelemetry Collector if it cannot support OpenTelemetry Collector Components. Maybe the word `additional` below is unnecessary and could be removed?

Reviewer 7: > Given that the licensing of the collector's source code does not require that distribution of derivative works happen in source form I'm not sure that we have much ability here to enforce such a requirement

We potentially have leverage over:
- Trademark usage if "OpenTelemetry Collector" becomes a trademark
- What we list on our registry and website and what we promote
- What wording can be used in 'official' OTel events

I think we have enough leverage here to make this worth it

Reviewer 5: I'm not sure that having a registered "OpenTelemetry Collector" mark is sufficient here as nominative fair use would allow anyone preparing a distribution (in the colloquial sense, not `Distribution` however we seek to define it) to identify it as such.  The Linux Foundation trademark usage guidelines also call out specifically this sort of usage as acceptable for indicating products are related to or based on the project that produces the product bearing their marks.

Obviously the project can control what it puts on its website and what marketing collateral is used in conjunction with events operated by LF/CNCF, but that doesn't seem like effective leverage over an actor who has no need or interest in such things.

Reviewer 8: I would generally say if someone isn't interested in "playing nice" then it doesn't really matter what we say or what we don't say. The solution to enforceable marks is offering certification and conformance suites that are attached to actual trademarks (e.g., "OTLP Inside" or whatever). This document is guidance for _the community_ as much as it is guidance for external parties.

Reviewer 9: What @austinlparker said along with my thinking that its important to define this, and include this requirement, to make clear why opentelemetry.io would or wouldn't list project Y as a Collector or Distribution.

- An OpenTelemetry Collector _MUST_ accept an [OpenTelemetry Collector configuration
  file](#opentelemetry-collector-configuration-file).
- An OpenTelemetry Collector _MUST_ be able to include any and all
  additional [Collector components](#opentelemetry-collector-components) that

>   the user wishes to include.

Reviewer 5: What happens when the user wishes to include two different components that both claim the same type string?  Does that then make every collector implementation non-compliant?

Author: I see this as an edge case that would be up to the components to sort out, unless there's a future where `type` is made a unique namespace somehow

Reviewer 5: I'm not sure how this needs to be resolved, but I think it does need to be resolved since as written this would make it trivial to create a situation where there can be no OpenTelemetry Collectors at all.

> - An OpenTelemetry Collector _MUST_ be able to include any and all
>   additional [Collector components](#opentelemetry-collector-components) that
>   the user wishes to include.

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
- An OpenTelemetry Collector _MUST_ be able to include additional compatible
  [Collector components](#opentelemetry-collector-components) that
  the user wishes to include.
```

> - An OpenTelemetry Collector _MUST_ be able to be compiled with any and all
>   additional [Collector components](#opentelemetry-collector-components) that
>   the user wishes to include.

Author: ```suggestion
- An OpenTelemetry Collector _MUST_ be able to include any and all
  additional [Collector components](#opentelemetry-collector-components) that
  the user wishes to include.
```

> ## OpenTelemetry Collector configuration file

Reviewer 11: Open points: 

- Should we require a specific schema? We'd need to define a schema for this. 
- Should we require a vaguely defined format, such as "OTel Collector YAML configuration file, as documented in the examples available on the website"?

Reviewer 5: I think a schema is required, at least for the shape of the configuration to the point where individual component configuration shapes become relevant.  My understanding of the intent of this requirement is to enable interoperability between collectors, which requires clarity and precision about what must be accepted in a configuration file.

Author: > "OTel Collector YAML configuration file, as documented in the examples available on the website"

Would this mean there would be an expectations of what components are available in all OpenTelemetry Collectors? My understanding was that we specifically didn't want to require any components to be included.

Reviewer 6: Related issue: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/issues/9769. I would like to avoid having to define a strict schema. If we must, we should restrict it to defining https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/c52d625647be61f6b507a216a557b8aa0c70fb22/otelcol/config.go#L21, with additional fields allowed.

Reviewer 5: > If we must, we should restrict it to defining https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/c52d625647be61f6b507a216a557b8aa0c70fb22/otelcol/config.go#L21, with additional fields allowed.

This is in line with what I meant by "at least for the shape of the configuration to the point where individual component configuration shapes become relevant."

Reviewer 11: That's also what I had in mind. Concretely:

```yaml
extensions:
processors:
exporters:
receivers:
service:
  extensions:
  pipelines:
    traces:
    metrics:
    traces:
  telemetry:
    logs:
    metrics:
    traces:
    resource:
```

Reviewer 11: To be explicit: my concern about _not_ specifying this is to have distributions that can't be configured the same way our docs have. If they can't configure with YAML, they likely can't reuse their knowledge elsewhere.

Reviewer 5: > If they can't configure with YAML, they likely can't reuse their knowledge elsewhere.

I think this might get more complicated when config providers and converters are in the picture as they can deal with a fair bit of difference in serialization format and content, but I generally agree that having these top-level configuration items is important.

Author: tried to capture the details from this thread in the document, PTAL

Reviewer 11: The section seems to be empty now.

Author: @jpkrohling forgot to push the changes, PTAL

Reviewer 11: LGTM now, thanks

## OpenTelemetry Collector components

For a library to be considered an OpenTelemetry Collector component, it _MUST_

> implement the [Component interface](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/component/component.go)

Reviewer 11: nit: link to the vanity link instead of a specific file branch in a specific repo? Or perhaps this? https://pkg.go.dev/go.opentelemetry.io/collector/component#Component

Author: Done

> implement the [Component interface](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/component/component.go)

Reviewer 7: The Collector also accepts `confmap.Provider`s and `confmap.Converter`s, which do not accept this interface. Do we consider those out of scope?

Reviewer 5: I think they do need to be considered in scope.  Interoperability of those components is important.

Author: > The Collector also accepts confmap.Providers and confmap.Converters, which do not accept this interface. Do we consider those out of scope?

I wonder if including them would allow us to avoid having to include a definition for a config file, wdyt?

Reviewer 7: Providers handle configuration abstractly so they help remove the need for how configuration should be represented, but they don't solve the schema part (which I don't feel like we need to solve tbh)

> implement the [Component interface](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/component/component.go)

Author: ```suggestion
implement the [Component interface](https://pkg.go.dev/go.opentelemetry.io/collector/component#Component)
```

> For a library to be considered an OpenTelemetry Collector component, it _MUST_
> implement the [Component interface](https://pkg.go.dev/go.opentelemetry.io/collector/component#Component)
> defined in the [opentelemetry-collector repository](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector).
> repository.

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
For a library to be considered an OpenTelemetry Collector component, it _MUST_
implement a [Component interface](https://pkg.go.dev/go.opentelemetry.io/collector/component#Component)
defined by the OpenTelemetry Collector SIG.
```

> 

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion

### Compatibility requirements

A component is defined as compatible with an OpenTelemetry Collector when its dependencies are
source- and version-compatible with the Component interfaces of that Collector.

For example, a Collector derived from version tag v0.100.0 of the [OpenTelemetry Collector](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector) _MUST_ support all components that 
are version-compatible with the Golang Component API defined in the `github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/component` module found in that repository.
```

## OpenTelemetry Collector Distribution

An OpenTelemetry Collector Distribution (Distro) is a compiled instance

> of an OpenTelemetry Collector with a specific set of components and features.

Reviewer 5: I think there needs to be room for a compiled binary distribution that has a fixed set of components and features.  The ADOT collector is only the ADOT collector when it has the set of components and features that are included in the binary that AWS produces and supports.  Users can certainly fork the repo and modify the component factories to include any components they wish, but at that point it stops being the ADOT collector and is something else.

> of an OpenTelemetry Collector with a specific set of components and features.

Author: > it might give the impression that a distribution doesn't have to enable users to include their own components, which is not in the spirit of the definition we discussed, right

I think of the distribution as a binary that includes a set of components defined in a manifest somewhere. maybe there needs to be an additional note that a user _SHOULD_ be able to take an existing distribution and modify it to include their own components.

> Users can certainly fork the repo and modify the component factories to include any components they wish, but at that point it stops being the ADOT collector and is something else.

Right, this is the same as I think of Linux or Kubernetes distributions, a distro comes with a packaged set of components.

> of an OpenTelemetry Collector with a specific set of components and features.

Author: I think this is resolved now with the added details

the OpenTelemetry Collector SIG are able to work with any vendor who claims
support for an OpenTelemetry Collector.

- An OpenTelemetry Collector _MUST_ accept an [OpenTelemetry Collector configuration
  file](#opentelemetry-collector-configuration-file).
- An OpenTelemetry Collector _MUST_ be able to include additional compatible
  [Collector components](#opentelemetry-collector-components) that
  the user wishes to include.

## OpenTelemetry Collector configuration file

An OpenTelemetry Collector configuration file is defined as YAML and _MUST_ support
the following [minimum structure](https://pkg.go.dev/go.opentelemetry.io/collector/otelcol#Config):

```yaml
receivers:
processors:
exporters:
connectors:
extensions:
service:
```

## OpenTelemetry Collector components

For a library to be considered an OpenTelemetry Collector component, it _MUST_
implement a [Component interface](https://pkg.go.dev/go.opentelemetry.io/collector/component#Component)
defined by the OpenTelemetry Collector SIG.

## OpenTelemetry Collector Distribution

An OpenTelemetry Collector Distribution (Distro) is a compiled instance

> of an OpenTelemetry Collector with a specific set of components and features.

Author: ```suggestion
of an OpenTelemetry Collector with a specific set of components and features. A
Distribution _SHOULD_ provide users with tools and/or documentation for adding
their own components to the Distribution.
```

  the user wishes to include.

## OpenTelemetry Collector configuration file

An OpenTelemetry Collector configuration file is defined as YAML and _MUST_ support
the following [minimum structure](https://pkg.go.dev/go.opentelemetry.io/collector/otelcol#Config):

```yaml
receivers:
processors:
exporters:
connectors:
extensions:
service:
```

## OpenTelemetry Collector components

For a library to be considered an OpenTelemetry Collector component, it _MUST_
implement a [Component interface](https://pkg.go.dev/go.opentelemetry.io/collector/component#Component)
defined by the OpenTelemetry Collector SIG.

### Compatibility requirements

A component is defined as compatible with an OpenTelemetry Collector when its dependencies are
source- and version-compatible with the Component interfaces of that Collector.

For example, a Collector derived from version tag v0.100.0 of the [OpenTelemetry Collector](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector) _MUST_ support all components that 
are version-compatible with the Golang Component API defined in the `github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/component` module found in that repository for that version tag.

> ## OpenTelemetry Collector Distribution

Author: ```suggestion

## OpenTelemetry Collector Distribution
```

- An OpenTelemetry Collector _MUST_ accept an [OpenTelemetry Collector configuration
  file](#opentelemetry-collector-configuration-file).
- An OpenTelemetry Collector _MUST_ be able to include additional compatible
  [Collector components](#opentelemetry-collector-components) that
  the user wishes to include.

## OpenTelemetry Collector configuration file

An OpenTelemetry Collector configuration file is defined as YAML and _MUST_ support
the following [minimum structure](https://pkg.go.dev/go.opentelemetry.io/collector/otelcol#Config):

```yaml
receivers:
processors:
exporters:
connectors:
extensions:
service:
```

## OpenTelemetry Collector components

For a library to be considered an OpenTelemetry Collector component, it _MUST_
implement a [Component interface](https://pkg.go.dev/go.opentelemetry.io/collector/component#Component)
defined by the OpenTelemetry Collector SIG.

Components require a unique identfier as a `type` string to be included in an OpenTelemetry
Collector. It is possible that multiple components use the same identifier, in which
case the two components cannot be used simultaneously in a single OpenTelemetry Collector. In

> order to resolve this, the clashing components must use a different identifier.

Reviewer 5: What is the mechanism for this?  AIUI the collector framework does not provide a mechanism to dynamically change the config type used by a component.  They're typically defined statically in the component's factory initializer.

Reviewer 7: Right now the mechanism is: use a different name if you were late to the party. We can support a better mechanism if this becomes a concern (via ocb or via some configuration mechanism)

### Compatibility requirements

A component is defined as compatible with an OpenTelemetry Collector when its dependencies are
source- and version-compatible with the Component interfaces of that Collector.

For example, a Collector derived from version tag v0.100.0 of the [OpenTelemetry Collector](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector) _MUST_ support all components that
are version-compatible with the Golang Component API defined in the `github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/component` module found in that repository for that version tag.

## OpenTelemetry Collector Distribution

An OpenTelemetry Collector Distribution (Distro) is a compiled instance
of an OpenTelemetry Collector with a specific set of components and features. A
Distribution _SHOULD_ provide users with tools and/or documentation for adding

> their own components to the Distribution.

Author: Would adding something like this help clarify?

```suggestion
their own components to the Distribution. Note that the resulting
binary from updating a Distribution to include new components
is no longer known as that Distribution.
```

Reviewer 4: Yes, thanks!

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
their own components to the Distribution. Note that the resulting
binary from updating a Distribution to include new components
is a different Distribution.
```

> their own components to the Distribution.

Author: There is additional details specifically calling out that adding components to an existing distribution results in a different distributions, hopefully that addresses your comment here

<!--- Hugo front matter used to generate the website version of this page:
path_base_for_github_subdir:
  from: tmp/otel/specification/collector/_index.md
  to: collector/README.md
--->

# OpenTelemetry Collector

The goal of this document is for users to be able to easily switch between
OpenTelemetry Collector Distros while also ensuring that components produced by
the OpenTelemetry Collector SIG are able to work with any vendor who claims
support for an OpenTelemetry Collector.

- An OpenTelemetry Collector _MUST_ accept an [OpenTelemetry Collector configuration
  file](#opentelemetry-collector-configuration-file).
- An OpenTelemetry Collector _MUST_ be able to include additional compatible
  [Collector components](#opentelemetry-collector-components) that
  the user wishes to include.

## OpenTelemetry Collector configuration file

An OpenTelemetry Collector configuration file is defined as YAML and _MUST_ support
the following [minimum structure](https://pkg.go.dev/go.opentelemetry.io/collector/otelcol#Config):

```yaml
receivers:
processors:
exporters:
connectors:
extensions:

> service:

Author: ```suggestion
service:
  telemetry:
  pipelines:
```

> ```

Reviewer 3: Would it make sense to specify more about the structure for service? Everything else is very up to the user based on the components they include, but service has more specific requirements for the pipeline that may be worth calling out. That being said, maybe this is like this until v1 is complete?

Author: added a suggestion to include telemetry and pipelines

implement a [Component interface](https://pkg.go.dev/go.opentelemetry.io/collector/component#Component)
defined by the OpenTelemetry Collector SIG.

Components require a unique identfier as a `type` string to be included in an OpenTelemetry
Collector. It is possible that multiple components use the same identifier, in which
case the two components cannot be used simultaneously in a single OpenTelemetry Collector. In
order to resolve this, the clashing components must use a different identifier.

### Compatibility requirements

A component is defined as compatible with an OpenTelemetry Collector when its dependencies are
source- and version-compatible with the Component interfaces of that Collector.

For example, a Collector derived from version tag v0.100.0 of the [OpenTelemetry Collector](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector) _MUST_ support all components that
are version-compatible with the Golang Component API defined in the `github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/component` module found in that repository for that version tag.

## OpenTelemetry Collector Distribution

An OpenTelemetry Collector Distribution (Distro) is a compiled instance

> of an OpenTelemetry Collector with a specific set of components and features. A
> Distribution _SHOULD_ provide users with tools and/or documentation for adding
> their own components to the Distribution. Note that the resulting

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
of an OpenTelemetry Collector with a specific set of components and features. A
Distribution author _SHOULD_ provide users with tools and/or documentation for adding
their own components to the Distribution's components. Note that the resulting
```

In this case the user is modifying the creation of a distribution, not the distribution itself (which has already been compiled). I think this makes it clear that the author of a distro should make it easy to modify the distro and not that the distro itself should have a way to add to its own compiled code (which the official distro can't technically do today.)

<!--- Hugo front matter used to generate the website version of this page:
path_base_for_github_subdir:
  from: tmp/otel/specification/collector/_index.md
  to: collector/README.md
--->

> # OpenTelemetry Collector

Reviewer 12: Could you please add a document status (presumably Development)?

Author: Done!

<!--- Hugo front matter used to generate the website version of this page:
path_base_for_github_subdir:
  from: tmp/otel/specification/collector/_index.md
  to: collector/README.md
--->

# OpenTelemetry Collector

**Status**: [Development](../document-status.md)

The goal of this document is for users to be able to easily switch between
OpenTelemetry Collector Distros while also ensuring that components produced by
the OpenTelemetry Collector SIG are able to work with any vendor who claims
support for an OpenTelemetry Collector.

- An OpenTelemetry Collector _MUST_ accept an [OpenTelemetry Collector configuration
  file](#opentelemetry-collector-configuration-file).
- An OpenTelemetry Collector _MUST_ be able to include additional compatible
  [Collector components](#opentelemetry-collector-components) that
  the user wishes to include.

> ## OpenTelemetry Collector configuration file

Reviewer 9: Is this section really required when it is already defined above that it must accept an OpenTelemetry Collector configuration?

Besides redundancy it makes this document a living document that would have to remember to be updated if a new top level key is ever added to the collector configuration file -- for the "minimum structure".

Author: The minimum supported configuration was asked in a previous comment and i added it. If there was a change to the minimum requirement, then this document will need to be updated. FWIW, the efforts to stabilize the collector to achieve 1.0 have not uncovered additional sections that would be required.

An OpenTelemetry Collector configuration file is defined as YAML and _MUST_ support
the following [minimum structure](https://pkg.go.dev/go.opentelemetry.io/collector/otelcol#Config):

```yaml
receivers:
processors:
exporters:
connectors:
extensions:
service:
  telemetry:
  pipelines:
```

## OpenTelemetry Collector components

For a library to be considered an OpenTelemetry Collector component, it _MUST_
implement a [Component interface](https://pkg.go.dev/go.opentelemetry.io/collector/component#Component)
defined by the OpenTelemetry Collector SIG.

> Components require a unique identfier as a `type` string to be included in an OpenTelemetry

Reviewer 9: Similar concern as above when you could just say it must implement the Component interface. And is this paragraph referring to the `type ID` in `Component` which says:

> The component ID (combination type + name) is unique for a given component.Kind. 

So multiple components can use the same identifier if they are of different `Kind`s?

Author: I've updated the wording to reference the documentation in the interface, and removed some details in this document.

Collector. It is possible that multiple components use the same identifier, in which
case the two components cannot be used simultaneously in a single OpenTelemetry Collector. In
order to resolve this, the clashing components must use a different identifier.

### Compatibility requirements

A component is defined as compatible with an OpenTelemetry Collector when its dependencies are
source- and version-compatible with the Component interfaces of that Collector.

For example, a Collector derived from version tag v0.100.0 of the [OpenTelemetry Collector](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector) _MUST_ support all components that
are version-compatible with the Golang Component API defined in the `github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/component` module found in that repository for that version tag.

## OpenTelemetry Collector Distribution

An OpenTelemetry Collector Distribution (Distro) is a compiled instance
of an OpenTelemetry Collector with a specific set of components and features. A
Distribution author _MUST_ provide users with tools and/or documentation for adding

> their own components to the Distribution's components. Note that the resulting

Reviewer 5: This seems problematic to me as a `MUST`.  This is, in effect, a requirement that distributions be made available in source form with a license that permits modification (and presumably distribution, though that's not clear).  The license under which the Collector is released does not require this and I'm suspicious of the ability to use trademark protections to prevent someone from using the phrasing "Foo Distribution for OpenTelemetry Collector" given that's literally the first "Correct" example in the [Linux Foundation trademark guidelines](https://www.linuxfoundation.org/legal/trademark-usage) and is a textbook case of nominative fair use.

I think if we want an identifier for compatible distributions that can be effectively controlled we will need a distinctive mark for a compatibility certification that can be granted to distributions that satisfy its requirements, similar to what @tedsuo seems to be describing [here](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/issues/8555#issuecomment-2183204418).

Beyond those concerns, this requirement also seems excessively vague.  What qualifies as "tools and/or documentation"?  Is a link to https://go.dev/dl/ sufficient?  This probably requires a definition similar to "Corresponding Source" from [AGPL-3](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/agpl-3.0.en.html), which again reinforces the limitations that come from not having this be part of the license under which the collector source code is made available.

Reviewer 11: The spirit here is to allow users to reuse their components when they move from one distribution to another: the engineering investments made should not be lost. If the distribution is open source and there's clear documentation how to add a new component to it, that's good enough for me. If the distribution is not open source but allows me to enter the Go module name on a web interface somewhere and get a binary out, that's also fine.

I'd see that binary as "tainted" (to use the kernel terminology) and the final binary might not be officially supported (with SLAs) by a service provider, but as an end-user, I'm not locked in.

Reviewer 5: This is a specification, so I don't think it's appropriate to leave ambiguity here and rely on interpretation of the "spirit" of the requirement.  This was changed from `SHOULD` to `MUST` in response to a [comment](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/4313#issuecomment-2555995595) seeking clarification that we intended to require distributions to allow users to modify their source and build new, modified, binaries.  

> If the distribution is not open source but allows me to enter the Go module name on a web interface somewhere and get a binary out, that's also fine.

I would not expect, and do not think it reasonable to expect, that any vendor offering a closed-source, binary-only distribution will allow users to provide arbitrary code to be built into a new "tainted" binary by that vendor.  Doing so would allow for a user to cause a vendor to distribute binaries built from code licensed under terms the vendor has no opportunity to review and which may require, for instance, that any code it is compiled with be distributed under the same terms.

Reviewer 11: > This is a specification, so I don't think it's appropriate to leave ambiguity here and rely on interpretation of the "spirit" of the requirement

I agree, my comment was more to provide the background, hoping that it would trigger ideas for a new wording.

Reviewer 9: This is defining what OpenTelemetry considers a distribution. To be considered a distribution by the project I'd think there is free reign over restrictions. That is different from trademark which would mean the project could actually stop someone else from saying, "This is an Otel Collector Distribution". So this wouldn't offer that protection, but instead define for others what the project will itself consider and call a distribution.

I'd still support rephrasing this to not requiring docs/tooling if it works with Otel docs and tooling. Which may mean "requiring" the documentation of all components within a distribution (otherwise how else would a user define an equivalent ocb configuration).

Author: Updating the phrasing to include that a distribution author may choose to use OpenTelemetry tooling, leveraging the documentation already provided by project.
